3.2 density plots (#46)
UBC-MDS/exploratory-data-viz: chapters/en/slides/module3/module3_02.Rmd

source('../../../../slide-setup.R')
# Remember to also manually update the YAML title above
```

type: slides

# Using density plots to visualize distributions

Notes:
In this module we will see how to use density plots
instead of histograms to represent distributions of data.

---

## Histograms can give different results depending on the data

<img src=/module3/histogram-and-shifted.png></img>

[From scikit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/auto_examples/neighbors/plot_kde_1d.html)

Notes:
How many observations are counted per bar in a histogram
depends on exactly where on the axis the border between the bins are.

In the images on this slide,
the actual observations are drawn with black tick marks on the bottom
and they are the same in both subplots.

The reason the histograms look different
is that the border between the groups is shifted in the rightmost picture.

As we see here,
a histogram is not an as unbiased plot as we might think at first,
especially not if we have few data points,
where the inclusion or exclusion of just a few points
makes a big difference for the bar height.

---

## Centering the bins on the data can help create more accurate distribution plots

> <img src=/module3/kde-buildup.gif></img>

Author: Ref youtube video that I made this gif from

Notes:
Instead of setting fixed lines along the axis
and then count plots fully in one bin or another,
we can create bins that are centered
on the data and then add them together.

When we center bins on the data,

> we also usually have a round shape 

Reviewer: I feel like more needs to be explained here.. Why do we give them a round shape? And it's not really round, its bell-shaped...

Author: I meant to say "rounded" I think. So this part I have simplified based on my understanding of the learners capabilities and previous comments on some section being too difficult, but I am happy to include more detail. In 531 I do mention that there are different kernels and briefly show them but don't have any real discussion around it because "everyone" just uses gaussian kernal for KDEs without any real good reason, it just happens to be the default option. And while gaussian reduces noise compares to a square top had kernel, which makes it looks more aesthically pleasing, I don't know if it is technically "the best" choice". From what I have read, the kernel that best represents the distribution (whatever that really means), is often epanechnikov, but in my testing there is not a large difference vs gaussian so might as well stick with the default. [Some examples here](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/auto_examples/neighbors/plot_kde_1d.html#sphx-glr-auto-examples-neighbors-plot-kde-1d-py
)
 
What do you think would be a suitable level of detail to include here? Since they haven't heard of p-values and error bars, I imagine they don't know of gaussian/normal and mentioning any of these kernels by name is not useful. Something like the suggestion below maybe?

Author: I rephrased this section

> When we center bins on the data,
> we also usually have a round shape 
> instead of a square one,
> which gives the impression of a smoother distribution
> that is more conducive to communicating the shape of the data distribution.

Author: ```suggestion
When we center bins on the data,
we usually give them a rounded shape
instead of a square one.
This removes noise or spikes in the plotted area,
which could arise when using a square kernel,
but it often not informative for us
when trying to get an overall idea of the distribution shape,
and a smoother area is more conducive to communicating the shape of the data distribution.
```

The round bins (also called kernels)
are then added together as in the gif in this slide,
and sum up to an overall distribution line.
Formally,
this is called a Kernel Density Estimate (KDE),
or just a density plot.

---

## The movies dataset

```{python}
import pandas as pd

movies = pd.read_csv('movies.csv')
movies
```

Notes:

> We will be using the movies dataset again,

Reviewer: To answer what question??? We need to provide context & motivation here for what we are doing. For example, 
"We will be using the movies data set again, this time to answer the question what is the minimum and maximum range of runtimes of movies, and what is the most common range of runtimes?

let's see if we can make a plot
that is easier to interpret
than the layered histograms
from the end of the last slide deck.

---

> ## Creating a density plot in Altair required two step

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating a density plot in Altair required two steps
```

```{python}
import altair as alt

(alt.Chart(movies).transform_density(
    'runtime',
    as_=['runtime', 'density'])  # Give a name to the KDE values, which we can use when plotting
 .mark_area().encode(
    x='runtime',
    y='density:Q'))
```

Notes:
To visualize a density plot,
we need to do two things:

> 1. Calculate the KDE (adding the individual kernels and summing them together)

Reviewer: Don't use KDE with these learners, too much new stuff is going on already, the do not need an acronym to remember as well.

Author: Good catch, I will switch to something like "adding the rounded bins together"

The new variable we create is called `'density'`,
and since this is not part of the pandas data frame,
Altair cannot ask pandas which data type it is.
Therefore,
we need to add `':Q'` to indicate that the density has quantitative (numeric) values.

---

## Creating a grouped density plot requires an explicit density grouping

```{python}
(alt.Chart(movies).transform_density(
     'runtime',
     groupby=['genre'],
     as_=['runtime', 'density'])
 .mark_area().encode(
     x='runtime',
     y='density:Q',
     color='genre'))
```

Notes:
If we want to split and color the densities
by a categorical variable,
we need to add an explicit `groupby` column
when calculating the density.
This computes one density 
per color variable (`genre` in this case),
that will then be colored accordingly
since we used the same variable for the color argument.

In this plot,
it is quite easy to see the relationship between movie lengths of different genres.
The history genre has the longest running movies
as well as the most variation
whereas most animation moves are shorter
and with less spread within the genre.

There are still a few things we could tweak to improve this plot!

---

> ## Creating smoother density plots with more calculation steps

Reviewer: I think a slide needs to be devoted to explaining what is going on here, at least at a conceptual level. Maybe an animation like you had in slide 3?

Author: Agree that an animation would be great but don't think that I have seen one. I might make a few plots instead. Ideally, I would not talk about this at all. I wish the default value for the steps was higher, I'm going to open a vegalite issue

```{python}
(alt.Chart(movies).transform_density(
     'runtime',
     groupby=['genre'],
     as_=['runtime', 'density'],
     steps=200)
 .mark_area().encode(
     x='runtime',
     y='density:Q',
     color='genre'))
```

Notes:
To make the curves smoother,
we can increase the resolution
over which the KDE is calculated
by setting the step size to a higher number.

Now there will be 200 points calculated,
which gives the area a smoother appearance.

---

## Making the overlapping areas slightly transparent make them easier to interpret

```{python}
(alt.Chart(movies).transform_density(
     'runtime',
     groupby=['genre'],
     as_=['runtime', 'density'],
     steps=200)
 .mark_area(opacity=0.4).encode(
     x='runtime',
     y='density:Q',
     color='genre'))
```

Notes:
The density areas don't suffer the same issues as the histograms when made transparent.
The continuous solid shape is easier to follow
even when it is semi transparent

> overlaps with the other areas.

Reviewer: But eventually it might, if you had A LOT of densities - could you facet vertically to solve such a problem with altair?  Kind of like a ridge plot? If so, it would be nice to add a slide here showing that.

Author: You could but[ it is a bit hacky and rather involved](https://altair-viz.github.io/gallery/ridgeline_plot.html). I will see if I can add a simpler example.

The transparency gives us the advantage
of knowing that there is not small density area hiding behind a bigger one.

---

## The y-axis does not indicate a meaningful value for density plots

```{python}

> (alt.Chart(movies).transform_density(

Reviewer: Why do you drop steps here? It makes the densities look a lot better and reinforces using it, I would carry it through now.

Author: Ideally, I would not talk about this at all. I wish the default value for the steps was higher, I went back to the default to make the code simpler and because we have limited vertical space in the slides

Author: Added it back in to the immediate slide but not when we switch to only having 10 data points.

     'runtime',
     groupby=['genre', 'country'],
     as_=['runtime', 'density'])
 .mark_area().encode(
     x='runtime',
     y='density:Q',
     color='genre')

>  .properties(height=265).facet('country'))

Author: Setting properties instead of changing slide height for now. Tracked in #47

Showing the density means that it is easier for us to compare the shape of the distributions
but is not really a useful numbers for us to know.

---

## Density plots of small datasets can be misleading

```{python}
(alt.Chart(movies[:10]).transform_density(
    'runtime',
    as_=['runtime', 'density'])  # Give a name to the KDE values, which we can use when plotting
 .mark_area().encode(
    x='runtime',
    y='density:Q'))
```

Notes:
Since density plots don't show the number of observations,
they can be very misleading for small data sets
as they will still appear smooth
as if there were many data points to back up that smoothness.

When looking at this plot,
are you be able to tell that
the density is made up of just ten observations?

It is a little bit easier in Altair to tel this,
because the default is to end the density where the data ends,
which often creates sharp borders as in this plot.

This is a great default in Altair,
but many other plotting packages
instead extend the density beyond the observations in the dataset
to make it more smooth
and it is therefore paramount
to always ask how many observations there are
before interpreting a density plot.

> 

Reviewer: Could adding a mark, like tick marks where each viz goes, be useful here to show that there are only 10 data points, and where they fall? 

This slide is also begging the question, would a histogram be better than a density in this small n situation?

Author: Good idea, let's add in another mark or add a subplot. One big concern is space on the slide.

I don't know the official answer to the second question, I would highlight that each come with their own caveats but those of the histogram might be more tolerable for a low n, I have a question on this in the lab
